
Ingredients

    1.5 cups all purpose flour/maida
    1 tsp baking powder
    a pinch of salt
    ½ cup water
    ½ cup melted butter or oil
    ¾ cup organic unrefined cane sugar or regular sugar - add as required * check notes
    4 tbsp yogurt/curd (dairy or vegan) + 1 tbsp water
    1 tbsp apple cider vinegar or white vinegar (substitute is 1 tbsp lime juice)
    ½ tsp baking soda
    1 tsp vanilla extract or vanilla powder or half of a vanilla bean, scraped

Instructions

    first sift the all purposed flour/maida with the baking powder and a pinch of salt in a mixing bowl or pan.
    just keep everything ready as you have to be quick enough to mix the batter.
    preheat the oven to 180 degrees C.
    grease a 6 or 7 inches pan with butter or oil.
    you can also line the pan with butter paper and then grease the butter paper with oil or butter.
    now take some butter and melt it in a small pan or microwave.
    you need to get about ½ cup of melted butter.
    just melt the butter. no need to heat it.
    when the butter is still warm or a bit hot, add the sugar to the melted butter.
    stir and mix well.
    keep aside.
    now in a measuring cup or in a small bowl, whisk the 3 tbsp yogurt + 1 tbsp water till smooth.
    add 1 tbsp vinegar.
    then add the baking soda and stir.
    pour the butter+sugar mixture, ½ cup water and the frothing yogurt+vinegar+baking soda into the sieved flour.
    add vanilla extract.
    be quick enough to fold and make a lump free batter.
    don't over do the folding.
    pour the batter in the greased baking pan.
    shake and tap the sides of the pan so that air bubbles are released.
    place the pan in the preheated oven in the center rack.
    keep the heating in both the bottom and top elements of the oven on.
    bake at 180 degrees C for 30-35 minutes or more till a tooth pick inserted in the cake comes out clean.
    if the vanilla cake browns too quickly on the top, then cover the top with an aluminium foil or butter paper.
    once done let the vanilla cake stand at room temperature for 7-8 minutes.
    then with the help of oven mitts, gently remove the vanilla cake on a wired tray or rack.
    once the vanilla cake cools, you can serve the eggless vanilla cake as it is or use the vanilla cake to make pastries or gateau.

